# Disease-causing mutations in the CLRN1 gene alter normal CLRN1 protein trafficking to the plasma membrane

> Source: https://www.rphope.org/post/disease-causing-mutations-in-the-clrn1-gene-alter-normal-clrn1-protein-trafficking-to-the-plasma-mem
>
> Meta description: To determine the effects of USH3 mutations on CLRN1 function, we examined the cellular distribution and stability of both normal and mutant

---

Disease-causing mutations in the CLRN1 gene alter normal CLRN1 protein trafficking to the plasma membrane
- Sep 8, 2009
- 7 min read
Isosomppi, J., Västinsalo, H., Geller, S. F., Heon, E., Flannery, J. G., & Sankila, E. M. | Molecular Vision | 2009 Sep 8 | Vol. 15 | pgs. 1806-18| [ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2742642/](http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2742642/)
Abstract
Purpose
Mutations of clarin 1 (CLRN1) cause Usher syndrome type 3 (USH3). To determine the effects of USH3 mutations on CLRN1 function, we examined the cellular distribution and stability of both normal and mutant CLRN1 in vitro. We also searched for novel disease-causing mutations in a cohort of 59 unrelated Canadian and Finnish USH patients.
Methods
Mutation screening was performed by DNA sequencing. For the functional studies, wild-type (WT) and mutant CLRN1 genes were expressed as hemagglutinin (HA) tagged fusion proteins by transient transfection of BHK-21 cells. Subcellular localization of CLRN1-HA was examined by confocal microscopy. The N-glycosylation status of CLRN1 was studied by using the N-glycosidase F (PNGase F) enzyme and western blotting. Cycloheximide treatment was used to assess the stability of CLRN1 protein.
Results
We found three previously reported pathogenic mutations, p.A123D, p.N48K, and p.Y176X, and a novel sequence variant, p.L54P, from the studied USH patients. The WT HA-tagged CLRN1 was correctly trafficked to the plasma membrane, whereas mutant CLRN1-HA proteins were mislocalized and retained in the endoplasmic reticulum. PNGase F treatment of CLRN1-HA resulted in an electrophoretic mobility shift consistent with sugar residue cleavage in WT and in all CLRN1 mutants except in p.N48K mutated CLRN1, in which the mutation abolishes the glycosylation site. Inhibition of protein expression with cycloheximide indicated that WT CLRN1-HA remained stable. In contrast, the CLRN1 mutants showed reduced stability.
Conclusions
WT CLRN1 is a glycoprotein localized to the plasma membrane in transfected BHK-21 cells. Mutant CLRN1 proteins are mislocalized. We suggest that part of the pathogenesis of USH3 may be associated with defective intracellular trafficking as well as decreased stability of mutant CLRN1 proteins.
Introduction
Usher syndrome (USH) describes a group of autosomal recessive diseases with bilateral sensorineural hearing loss and visual impairment phenotypically similar to retinitis pigmentosa (RP) [[1](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r1)-[4](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r4)]. Prevalence of USH in different populations is estimated to range from 3.5 to 6.2 per 100,000, thus making it the most frequent cause of combined deaf-blindness worldwide [[5](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r5)]. The condition has been classified into three clinical subtypes (USH1, USH2, and USH3), based on the severity and progression of the hearing impairment, presence or absence of vestibular dysfunction, and the age of onset of RP [[1](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r1)]. This classification remains in clinical use, although recent progress on the molecular genetics and clinical research of USH has revealed broad genetic and clinical heterogeneity [[3](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r3),[6](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r6)]. Atypical forms of USH have been identified within all three clinical types, and there is considerable overlap of symptoms among the subtypes. A distinguishing feature of USH3 is the wide spectrum of nonlinear progressive hearing impairment, which ranges from a near normal to a severe audiometric phenotype [[7](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r7)]. USH3 patients may also have either normal or decreased vestibular responses [[8](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r8)]. The rate of visual loss in USH3 is similar to other USH subtypes [[9](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r9)], with the most recent analyses suggesting that retinal degeneration in USH3 progresses more rapidly than in USH2A [[10](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r10),[11](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r11)]. The variable phenotype may cause USH3 to be under-diagnosed and it may be more prevalent than previously indicated [[6](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r6)].
To date, nine USH gene products have been identified: the molecular motor myosin VIIa (USH1B) [[12](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r12)]; the cell adhesion proteins cadherin 23 (USH1D) [[13](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r13)] and protocadherin 15 (USH1F) [[14](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r14),[15](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r15)]; the scaffold proteins harmonin (USH1C) [[16](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r16)], SANS (USH1G) [[17](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r17)], and whirlin (USH2D) [[18](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r18)]; the G-protein-coupled 7-transmembrane receptor VLGR1b (USH2C) [[19](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r19)]; two isoforms of the extracellular matrix connected protein usherin (USH2A) [[20](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r20),[21](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r21)]; and the four-pass transmembrane domain protein clarin 1 (USH3) [[22](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r22),[23](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r23)]. There is growing evidence suggesting that these proteins form a network, which is critical for the development and maintenance of the sensorineural cells in the inner ear and the retina [[3](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r3),[4](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r4),[24](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r24)-[28](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2742642/#r28)].
References
- Petit C. Usher syndrome: from genetics to pathogenesis. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2001;2:271–97. doi: 10.1146/annurev.genom.2.1.271. 
- Ahmed ZM, Riazuddin S, Wilcox ER. The molecular genetics of Usher syndrome. Clin Genet. 2003;63:431–44. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2003.00109.x. 
- Reiners J, Nagel-Wolfrum K, Jurgens K, Marker T, Wolfrum U. Molecular basis of human Usher syndrome: deciphering the meshes of the Usher protein network provides insights into the pathomechanisms of the Usher disease. Exp Eye Res. 2006;83:97–119. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2005.11.010. 
- Kremer H, van Wijk E, Märker T, Wolfrum U, Roepman R. Usher syndrome: molecular links of pathogenesis, proteins and pathways. Hum Mol Genet. 2006;15:R262–70. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl205. 
- Spandau UH, Rohrschneider K. Prevalence and geographical distribution of Usher syndrome in Germany. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2002;240:495–8. doi: 10.1007/s00417-002-0485-8. 
- Cohen M, Bitner-Glindzicz M, Luxon L. The changing face of Usher syndrome: clinical implications. Int J Audiol. 2007;46:82–93. doi: 10.1080/14992020600975279. 
- Plantinga RF, Kleemola L, Huygen PL, Joensuu T, Sankila EM, Pennings RJ, Cremers CW. Serial audiometry and speech recognition findings in Finnish Usher syndrome type III patients. Audiol Neurootol. 2005;10:79–89. doi: 10.1159/000083363. 
- Sadeghi M, Cohn ES, Kimberling WJ, Tranebjaerg L, Moller C. Audiological and vestibular features in affected subjects with USH3: a genotype/phenotype correlation. Int J Audiol. 2005;44:307–16. doi: 10.1080/14992020500060610. 
- Pakarinen L, Tuppurainen K, Laippala P, Mantyjarvi M, Puhakka H. The ophthalmological course of Usher syndrome type III. Int Ophthalmol. 1995;19:307–11. doi: 10.1007/BF00130927. 
- Plantinga RF, Pennings RJ, Huygen PL, Sankila EM, Tuppurainen K, Kleemola L, Cremers CW, Deutman AF. Visual impairment in Finnish Usher syndrome type III. Acta Ophthalmol Scand. 2006;84:36–41. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0420.2005.00507. 
- Herrera W, Aleman TS, Cideciyan AV, Roman AJ, Banin E, Ben-Yosef T, Gardner LM, Sumaroka A, Windsor EA, Schwartz SB, Stone EM, Liu XZ, Kimberling WJ, Jacobson SG. Retinal disease in Usher syndrome III caused by mutations in the clarin-1 gene. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2008;49:2651–60. doi: 10.1167/iovs.07-1505. 
- Weil D, Blanchard S, Kaplan J, Guilford P, Gibson F, Walsh J, Mburu P, Varela A, Levilliers J, Weston MD, Kelley PM, Kimberling WJ, Levi-Acobas MWF, Larget-Piet D, Munnich A, Steel KP, Brown SDM, Petit C. Defective myosin VIIA gene responsible for Usher syndrome type 1B. Nature. 1995;374:60–1. doi: 10.1038/374060a0. 
- Bolz H, von Brederlow B, Ramírez A, Bryda EC, Kutsche K, Nothwang HG, Seeliger M. del C-Salcedó Cabrera M, Vila MC, Molina OP, Gal A, Kubisch C. Mutation of CDH23, encoding a new member of the cadherin gene family, causes Usher syndrome type 1D. Nat Genet. 2001;27:108–12. doi: 10.1038/83667. 
- Ahmed ZM, Riazuddin S, Bernstein SL, Ahmed Z, Khan S, Griffith AJ, Morell RJ, Friedman TB, Riazuddin S, Wilcox ER. Mutations of the protocadherin gene PCDH15 cause Usher syndrome type 1F. Am J Hum Genet. 2001;69:25–34. doi: 10.1086/321277. 
- Alagramam KN, Yuan H, Kuehn MH, Murcia CL, Wayne S, Srisailpathy CR, Lowry RB, Knaus R, Van Laer L, Bernier FP, Schwartz S, Lee C, Morton CC, Mullins RF, Ramesh A, Van Camp G, Hageman GS, Woychik RP, Smith RJ. Mutations in the novel protocadherin PCDH15 cause Usher syndrome type 1F. Hum Mol Genet. 2001;10:1709–18. doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.16.1709. 
- Verpy E, Leibovici M, Zwaenepoel I, Liu XZ, Gal A, Salem N, Mansour A, Blanchard S, Kobayashi I, Keats BJ, Slim R, Petit C. A defect in harmonin, a PDZ domain-containing protein expressed in the inner ear sensory hair cells, underlies Usher syndrome type 1C. Nat Genet. 2000;26:51–5. doi: 10.1038/79171. 
- Weil D, El-Amraoui A, Masmoudi S, Mustapha M, Kikkawa Y, Lainé S, Delmaghani S, Adato A, Nadifi S, Zina ZB, Hamel C, Gal A, Ayadi H, Yonekawa H, Petit C. Usher syndrome type I G (USH1G) is caused by mutations in the gene encoding SANS, a protein that associates with the USH1C protein, harmonin. Hum Mol Genet. 2003;12:463–71. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg051. 
- Ebermann I, Scholl HP, Charbel Issa P, Becirovic E, Lamprecht J, Jurklies B, Millán JM, Aller E, Mitter D, Bolz H. A novel gene for Usher syndrome type 2: mutations in the long isoform of whirlin are associated with retinitis pigmentosa and sensorineural hearing loss. Hum Genet. 2007;121:203–11. doi: 10.1007/s00439-006-0304-0. 
- Weston MD, Luijendijk MW, Humphrey KD, Moller C, Kimberling WJ. Mutations in the VLGR1 gene implicate G-protein signaling in the pathogenesis of Usher syndrome type II. Am J Hum Genet. 2004;74:357–66. doi: 10.1086/381685. 
- Eudy JD, Yao S, Weston MD, Ma-Edmonds M, Talmadge CB, Cheng JJ, Kimberling WJ, Sumegi J. Isolation of a gene encoding a novel member of the nuclear receptor superfamily from the critical region of Usher syndrome type IIa at 1q41. Genomics. 1998;50:382–4. doi: 10.1006/geno.1998.5345. 
- van Wijk E, Pennings RJ, te Brinke H, Claassen A, Yntema HG, Hoefsloot LH, Cremers FP, Cremers CW, Kremer H. Identification of 51 novel exons of the Usher syndrome type 2A (USH2A) gene that encode multiple conserved functional domains and that are mutated in patients with Usher syndrome type II. Am J Hum Genet. 2004;74:738–44. doi: 10.1086/383096. 
- Joensuu T, Hämäläinen R, Yuan B, Johnson C, Tegelberg S, Gasparini P, Zelante L, Pirvola U, Pakarinen L, Lehesjoki AE, de la Chapelle A, Sankila EM. Mutations in a novel gene with transmembrane domains underlie Usher syndrome type 3. Am J Hum Genet. 2001;69:673–84. doi: 10.1086/323610. 
- Adato A, Vreugde S, Joensuu T, Avidan N, Hamalainen R, Belenkiy O, Olender T, Bonne-Tamir B, Ben-Asher E, Espinos C, Millán JM, Lehesjoki AE, Flannery JG, Avraham KB, Pietrokovski S, Sankila EM, Beckmann JS, Lancet D. USH3A transcripts encode clarin-1, a four-transmembrane-domain protein with a possible role in sensory synapses. Eur J Hum Genet. 2002;10:339–50. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200831. 
- El-Amraoui A, Petit C. Usher I syndrome: unravelling the mechanisms that underlie the cohesion of the growing hair bundle in inner ear sensory cells. J Cell Sci. 2005;118:4593–603. doi: 10.1242/jcs.02636. 
- Reiners J, van Wijk E, Märker T, Zimmermann U, Jürgens K, te Brinke H, Overlack N, Roepman R, Knipper M, Kremer H, Wolfrum U. Scaffold protein harmonin (USH1C) provides molecular links between Usher syndrome type 1 and type 2. Hum Mol Genet. 2005;14:3933–43. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi417. 
- Adato A, Michel V, Kikkawa Y, Reiners J, Alagramam KN, Weil D, Yonekawa H, Wolfrum U, El-Amraoui A, Petit C. Interactions in the network of Usher syndrome type 1 proteins. Hum Mol Genet. 2005;14:347–56. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi031. 
- Maerker T, van Wijk E, Overlack N, Kersten FF, McGee J, Goldmann T, Sehn E, Roepman R, Walsh EJ, Kremer H, Wolfrum U. A novel Usher protein network at the periciliary reloading point between molecular transport machineries in vertebrate photoreceptor cells. Hum Mol Genet. 2008;17:71–86. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm285. 
- Tian G, Zhou Y, Hajkova D, Miyagi M, Dinculescu A, Hauswirth WW, Palczewski K, Geng R, Alagramam KN, Isosomppi J, Sankila EM, Flannery JG, Imanishi Y. Clarin-1, encoded by the Usher syndrome III causative gene, forms a membranous microdomain: possible role of clarin-1 in organizing the actin cytoskeleton. J Biol Chem. 2009;284:18980–93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.003160.
